README.md, before:



# Allotaxonometer UI


<img width="50%" alt="pipeline" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/41375b5f-e942-499f-aea4-bca004767e52">

<p>

- Visit our [single-page web application](https://vermont-complex-systems.github.io/complex-stories/allotaxonometry) to try it out online.
- Use [py-allotax](https://github.com/compstorylab/py-allotax) to use allotaxonometry programmatically ([:octocat: github](https://github.com/compstorylab/py-allotax))
- We also maintain a [matlab version](https://gitlab.com/compstorylab/allotaxonometer) to use allotaxonometry at scale.

Headless UI components for allotaxonometer visualizations built with Svelte 5.

## Installation

```bash
npm install allotaxonometer-ui
```

## Use cases and install

- Explore systems and formulate research questions: we recommend starting with the web app...
- Running multiple or larger scale analyses: we recommend using the py-allotax, which details its install instructions, details the required data format, and provides examples in its repo.

## CSV input

The allotaxonometer expects 2 tables in the following form:

|    | types   |   counts |   totalunique |   probs |
|----|---------|----------|---------------|---------|
|  0 | John    |     8502 |          1161 |  0.0766 |
|  1 | William |     7494 |          1161 |  0.0675 |
|  2 | James   |     5097 |          1161 |  0.0459 |
|  3 | George  |     4458 |          1161 |  0.0402 |
|  4 | Charles |     4061 |          1161 |  0.0366 |


## Paper data

#### Babynames data

The original babyname dataset for boys and girls can be found on the [catalog.data.gov](https://catalog.data.gov/dataset?tags=baby-names) website. But we use the dataset [here](http://pdodds.w3.uvm.edu/permanent-share/pocs-babynames.zip) to replicate the original paper. You can find a 5-years aggregated version used in the `Observable` version in `data/`. The original dataset includes each year from 1880–2018, which have 5 or more applications. You can convert the original folder into the formatted `.json` file using R with the following command:

```R
read_and_write_babyname_dat <- function(fname, gender) {
  d <- readr::read_csv(fname, 
                       col_names = c("types", "gender", "counts"), 
                       col_select = c("types", "counts"),
                       col_types = c("c", "i"))
  
  d$probs <- d$counts / sum(d$counts)
  d$total_unique <- nrow(d)
  return(d)
}
# You need to be in the folder above `data/`, which is the unzip folder contained in 
# http://pdodds.w3.uvm.edu/permanent-share/pocs-babynames.zip
purrr::map(
  list.files("data/", pattern = "names-boys*"), 
  ~read_and_write_babyname_dat(paste("data", .x, sep = "/"), "boys")
)

purrr::map(
  list.files("data/", pattern = "names-girls*"), 
  ~read_and_write_babyname_dat(paste("data", .x, sep = "/"), "girls")
)
```

#### Twitter data

We access the Twitter data from the Comptuational Story Lab [storywrangling](https://gitlab.com/compstorylab/storywrangling)' API. Unfortunately, the API only work when you are connected on the University of Vermont's VPN. Follow the instructions [here](https://www.uvm.edu/it/kb/article/install-cisco-vpn/) to get the VPN working. Once this is done, run the following lines from the command line:

```shell
git clone https://gitlab.com/compstorylab/storywrangling.git
cd storywrangling
pip install -e .
```

Then from `python` you can get the top ngram count with rank data for any given day with the following:

```python
from storywrangling import Storywrangler
from datetime import datetime
import json
from pathlib import Path

def get_ngram(yr, month, day, fname=False):
    storywrangler = Storywrangler()
    ngram_zipf = storywrangler.get_zipf_dist(
        date=datetime(yr, month, day),
        lang="en", ngrams="1grams",
        max_rank=10000, rt=False
    ).reset_index()\
     .rename(columns={
        "ngram":"types", "count":"counts", "count_no_rt":"counts_no_rt",
        "rank":"rank", "rank_no_rt":"rank_no_rt", "freq":"probs", "freq_no_rt":"probs_no_rt"
        })\
     .dropna()\
     .assign(totalunique = lambda x: x.shape[0])\
     .loc[:, ["types", "counts", "totalunique", "probs"]]\
     .to_dict(orient="index")

    ngram_zipf = { f"{yr}_{month}_{day}": [_ for _ in ngram_zipf.values()] }

    if fname:
        if Path(fname).exists():
            with open(fname) as f:
                old_dat = json.load(f)
            
            ngram_zipf.update(old_dat)

        with open(fname, 'w') as f:
            json.dump(ngram_zipf, f)
    else:
       return ngram_zipf
```

Note that this solution is a bit clunky. At some point we would prefer to have a sql DB that we can interact with. 

#### Species Abundance Data

We access the species abundance data from https://datadryad.org/stash/dataset/doi:10.15146/5xcp-0d46, downloading the full dataset, unzipping it, and then loading bci.tree\<i\>.rdata for i in (1-8), as well as bci.spptable.rdata. We then run the following code to subset the full census represented by each of the bci.tree\<i\>.rdata to get the counts of the species of the trees alive during that census, combine merge that with the species name database to get the full name, and then put it in the format that our allotaxonometer code expects:

```r    
library(Sys)
library(dplyr)
library("rlist")
library(jsonlite)

tree_data <- vector("list", length=8)



dfs = list(bci.tree1, bci.tree2, bci.tree3, bci.tree4,  bci.tree5, bci.tree6, bci.tree7, bci.tree8)


for (i in seq_along(dfs)) {
  print(i)
  full_census <- merge(dfs[[i]], bci.spptable, by='sp') 
  alive_census <-full_census[full_census$status %in% c('A','AD'),] # A='Alive', AD='A seldom-used code, applied when a tree was noted as dead in one census but was found alive in a later census. For most purposes, this code should be interpreted the same as code A for alive.'
  count_df <- dplyr::count(alive_census, Latin, sort = TRUE)
  names(count_df)[names(count_df) == 'Latin'] <- 'types'
  names(count_df)[names(count_df) == 'n'] <- 'counts'
  count_df['totalunique'] <- nrow(count_df)
  count_df['probs']<-count_df['counts'] / nrow(alive_census)
  tree_data[[i]] <- count_df
}

names(tree_data) <- c("1981-1983", "1985", "1991-1992", "1995-1996", "2000-2001", "2005-2006", "2010-2011", "2013-2015")

exportJson <- toJSON(tree_data)
write(exportJson, "tree_species_counts.json")
```

Commit message:

making probs and totalunique optional

README.md, after:



# Allotaxonometer UI


<img width="50%" alt="pipeline" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/41375b5f-e942-499f-aea4-bca004767e52">

<p>

- Visit our [single-page web application](https://vermont-complex-systems.github.io/complex-stories/allotaxonometry) to try it out online.
- Use [py-allotax](https://github.com/compstorylab/py-allotax) to use allotaxonometry programmatically ([:octocat: github](https://github.com/compstorylab/py-allotax))
- We also maintain a [matlab version](https://gitlab.com/compstorylab/allotaxonometer) to use allotaxonometry at scale.

Headless UI components for allotaxonometer visualizations built with Svelte 5.

## Installation

```bash
npm install allotaxonometer-ui
```

## Use cases and install

- Explore systems and formulate research questions: we recommend starting with the web app...
- Running multiple or larger scale analyses: we recommend using the py-allotax, which details its install instructions, details the required data format, and provides examples in its repo.

## Data Input

The allotaxonometer expects 2 datasets with `types` and `counts`. The `totalunique` and `probs` fields are **optional** and will be calculated automatically if not provided.

### Minimal Format (Recommended)
```javascript
const data = [{
  types: ['John', 'William', 'James', 'George', 'Charles'],
  counts: [8502, 7494, 5097, 4458, 4061]
  // totalunique and probs calculated automatically!
}];
```

### Full Format (All Fields)
|    | types   |   counts |   totalunique |   probs |
|----|---------|----------|---------------|---------|
|  0 | John    |     8502 |          1161 |  0.0766 |
|  1 | William |     7494 |          1161 |  0.0675 |
|  2 | James   |     5097 |          1161 |  0.0459 |
|  3 | George  |     4458 |          1161 |  0.0402 |
|  4 | Charles |     4061 |          1161 |  0.0366 |


## Paper data

#### Babynames data

The original babyname dataset for boys and girls can be found on the [catalog.data.gov](https://catalog.data.gov/dataset?tags=baby-names) website. But we use the dataset [here](http://pdodds.w3.uvm.edu/permanent-share/pocs-babynames.zip) to replicate the original paper. You can find a 5-years aggregated version used in the `Observable` version in `data/`. The original dataset includes each year from 1880–2018, which have 5 or more applications. You can convert the original folder into the formatted `.json` file using R with the following command:

```R
read_and_write_babyname_dat <- function(fname, gender) {
  d <- readr::read_csv(fname, 
                       col_names = c("types", "gender", "counts"), 
                       col_select = c("types", "counts"),
                       col_types = c("c", "i"))
  
  d$probs <- d$counts / sum(d$counts)
  d$total_unique <- nrow(d)
  return(d)
}
# You need to be in the folder above `data/`, which is the unzip folder contained in 
# http://pdodds.w3.uvm.edu/permanent-share/pocs-babynames.zip
purrr::map(
  list.files("data/", pattern = "names-boys*"), 
  ~read_and_write_babyname_dat(paste("data", .x, sep = "/"), "boys")
)

purrr::map(
  list.files("data/", pattern = "names-girls*"), 
  ~read_and_write_babyname_dat(paste("data", .x, sep = "/"), "girls")
)
```

#### Twitter data

We access the Twitter data from the Comptuational Story Lab [storywrangling](https://gitlab.com/compstorylab/storywrangling)' API. Unfortunately, the API only work when you are connected on the University of Vermont's VPN. Follow the instructions [here](https://www.uvm.edu/it/kb/article/install-cisco-vpn/) to get the VPN working. Once this is done, run the following lines from the command line:

```shell
git clone https://gitlab.com/compstorylab/storywrangling.git
cd storywrangling
pip install -e .
```

Then from `python` you can get the top ngram count with rank data for any given day with the following:

```python
from storywrangling import Storywrangler
from datetime import datetime
import json
from pathlib import Path

def get_ngram(yr, month, day, fname=False):
    storywrangler = Storywrangler()
    ngram_zipf = storywrangler.get_zipf_dist(
        date=datetime(yr, month, day),
        lang="en", ngrams="1grams",
        max_rank=10000, rt=False
    ).reset_index()\
     .rename(columns={
        "ngram":"types", "count":"counts", "count_no_rt":"counts_no_rt",
        "rank":"rank", "rank_no_rt":"rank_no_rt", "freq":"probs", "freq_no_rt":"probs_no_rt"
        })\
     .dropna()\
     .assign(totalunique = lambda x: x.shape[0])\
     .loc[:, ["types", "counts", "totalunique", "probs"]]\
     .to_dict(orient="index")

    ngram_zipf = { f"{yr}_{month}_{day}": [_ for _ in ngram_zipf.values()] }

    if fname:
        if Path(fname).exists():
            with open(fname) as f:
                old_dat = json.load(f)
            
            ngram_zipf.update(old_dat)

        with open(fname, 'w') as f:
            json.dump(ngram_zipf, f)
    else:
       return ngram_zipf
```

Note that this solution is a bit clunky. At some point we would prefer to have a sql DB that we can interact with. 

#### Species Abundance Data

We access the species abundance data from https://datadryad.org/stash/dataset/doi:10.15146/5xcp-0d46, downloading the full dataset, unzipping it, and then loading bci.tree\<i\>.rdata for i in (1-8), as well as bci.spptable.rdata. We then run the following code to subset the full census represented by each of the bci.tree\<i\>.rdata to get the counts of the species of the trees alive during that census, combine merge that with the species name database to get the full name, and then put it in the format that our allotaxonometer code expects:

```r    
library(Sys)
library(dplyr)
library("rlist")
library(jsonlite)

tree_data <- vector("list", length=8)



dfs = list(bci.tree1, bci.tree2, bci.tree3, bci.tree4,  bci.tree5, bci.tree6, bci.tree7, bci.tree8)


for (i in seq_along(dfs)) {
  print(i)
  full_census <- merge(dfs[[i]], bci.spptable, by='sp') 
  alive_census <-full_census[full_census$status %in% c('A','AD'),] # A='Alive', AD='A seldom-used code, applied when a tree was noted as dead in one census but was found alive in a later census. For most purposes, this code should be interpreted the same as code A for alive.'
  count_df <- dplyr::count(alive_census, Latin, sort = TRUE)
  names(count_df)[names(count_df) == 'Latin'] <- 'types'
  names(count_df)[names(count_df) == 'n'] <- 'counts'
  count_df['totalunique'] <- nrow(count_df)
  count_df['probs']<-count_df['counts'] / nrow(alive_census)
  tree_data[[i]] <- count_df
}

names(tree_data) <- c("1981-1983", "1985", "1991-1992", "1995-1996", "2000-2001", "2005-2006", "2010-2011", "2013-2015")

exportJson <- toJSON(tree_data)
write(exportJson, "tree_species_counts.json")
```
